Order Requirement Analysis (#58)
apache/datafusion-site: content/blog/2025-03-05-ordering-analysis.md

author: Mustafa Akur
categories: [tutorial]
---

<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

<!-- see https://github.com/apache/datafusion/issues/11631 for details -->

## Introduction

In this blog post, we will explore how to determine whether an ordering requirement[^1] of an operator is satisfied by its input data. This analysis is essential for order-based optimizations and is often more complex than one might initially think.

> Some operators in the physical query plan require their input data to be ordered. The reasons for these requirements include:

Author: I have incorporated this suggestion into the blog post with very minor changes. Thanks @alamb for the suggestions

```
If we don't know anything about the `telemetry` table, we need to sort it by `time ASC` and then retrieve the first 10 rows to get the correct result. However, if the table is already ordered by `time ASC`, simply retrieving the first 10 rows is sufficient. This approach executes much faster and uses less memory compared to the first version.

The key is that the query optimizer needs to know the data is already sorted. For simple queries that is likely simple, but it gets complicated fast, like for example, what if your data is sorted by `[hostname, time ASC]` and your query is
```sql
SELECT hostname, log_line 
FROM telemetry WHERE hostname = 'app.example.com' ORDER BY time ASC;
```
In this case, the system still doesn't have to do any sorting -- but only if it has enough analysis to be able to reason about the sortedness of the stream when we know `hostname` has a single value.

### Optimizing Execution Modes Using Ordering Information
As another use case, some operators can utilize the ordering information to change its underlying algorithm to execute more efficiently. Consider the following query:
```SQL
SELECT COUNT(log_line) 
FROM telemetry GROUP BY hostname;
```

> when `telemetry` is sorted by `hostname`, aggregation doesn't need to hash the entire data at its input. It can use a much more efficient algorithm for grouping the data according to the `hostname` values. Failure to detect the ordering can result in choosing the sub-optimal algorithm variant for the operator. To see this in practice, check out the [source](https://github.com/apache/datafusion/tree/main/datafusion/physical-plan/src/aggregates/order) for ordered variant of the `Aggregation` in `Datafusion`.

Reviewer: `input is sorted corectly` ... ->  input is sorted correctly

## Analysis
Let's start by creating an example table that we will refer throughout the post. This table models the input data of an operator for the analysis:

### Example Virtual Table

<style>
  table {
    border-collapse: collapse;
    width: 80%;
    font-family: -apple-system, BlinkMacSystemFont, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;
  }
  th, td {
    padding: 12px 16px;
    text-align: left;
    border-bottom: 1px solid #e0e0e0;
  }
  th {
    background-color: #f9f9f9;
    font-weight: 600;
  }
  tr:hover {
    background-color: #f1f1f1;
  }
</style>

> <table>

Reviewer 2: Since `time` and `time_bin` are functionally dependent, a reader may ask why our analysis doesn't cover that case

Maybe we can also add a note that DataFusion is able to determine that an expression like `date_bin(time, 'hour')` is sorted the same as `time` but that that analysis is outside the scope of this blog.

Author: I have added a section related to this with [commit](116a80dac30f669e4cd7cd1e9ccc3abeceedbe51)

  - Store all the valid ordering expressions that the tables satisfies  
  - Check whether the ordering requirement by the operator is among valid orderings.  

This naive algorithm works and correct. However, listing all valid orderings can be quite lenghy and not scalable. As an example, for the example table following orderings are all valid (This is only a small subset of all valid orderings).

`[amount ASC]`  
`[amount ASC, price ASC]`  
`[amount ASC, price_cloned ASC]`  
`[hostname ASC, amount ASC, price_cloned ASC]`  
`[amount ASC, hostname ASC,  price_cloned ASC]`  
`[amount ASC, price_cloned ASC, hostname ASC]`  
.  
.  
.  

As can be seen from the listing above. Storing all of the valid orderings is wasteful, and contains lots of redundancy. Some of the problems in this approach are:

- Storing prefix of another valid ordering is redundant. If the table satisfies lexicographic ordering<sup id="fn1">[1](#footnote1)</sup>: `[amount ASC, price ASC]`, it already satisfies ordering `[amount ASC]` trivially. Hence, once we store `[amount ASC, price ASC]` we do not need to store `[amount ASC]` separately.

> - Using all columns that are equal to each other in the listings is redundant. If we know that ordering `[amount ASC, price ASC]` is satisfied by the table, table also satisfies `[amount ASC, price_cloned ASC]` since `price` and `price_cloned` are copy of each other. It is enough to use just one expression among the expressions that exact copy of each other.

Reviewer: `the table is orderd by` -> `the table is ordered by`

> - Constant expressions can be inserted into any place inside valid ordering with an arbitrary direction (e.g. `ASC`, `DESC`). Hence, If ordering `[amount ASC, price ASC]` is valid, orderings: <br>

Reviewer: `it is also orderd by` -> `it is also ordered by`

### 2. Equivalent Expression Groups
Equivalent expression groups are expressions that always hold the same value across rows. These expressions can be thought of as clones of each other and may arise from operations like `Filter`, `Join`, or `Projection`.

In the example table, the expressions `price` and `price_cloned` form one equivalence group, and `time` and `time_cloned` form another equivalence group.

<blockquote style="border-left: 4px solid #007bff; padding: 10px; background-color: #f8f9fa;">
    <strong>Note:</strong>Equivalent expression groups can arise during the query execution, in the following query:<br>
    <code>SELECT time, time as time_cloned FROM logs</code> <br>
    after the projection is done, for subsequent operators 'time' and 'time_cloned' will form an equivalence group. As another example, in the following query:<br>
    <code>SELECT employees.id, employees.name, departments.department_name</code>
<code>FROM employees</code>
<code>JOIN departments ON employees.department_id = departments.id;</code> <br>
after joining, 'employees.department_id' and 'departments.id' will form an equivalence group.
</blockquote>

### 3. Succint Valid Orderings

> Valid orderings are the orderings that the table already satisfies. However, naively enlisting them is not scalable as discussed before. We enlist all of the valid orderings after following constraints are applied:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Valid orderings are the orderings that the table already satisfies. However, naively listing them requires exponential space as the number of columns grows as discussed before. Instead, we list all valid orderings after following constraints are applied:
```

After applying the first and second constraint, example table simplifies to 

<style>
  table {
    border-collapse: collapse;
    width: 80%;
    font-family: -apple-system, BlinkMacSystemFont, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif;
  }
  th, td {
    padding: 12px 16px;
    text-align: left;
    border-bottom: 1px solid #e0e0e0;
  }
  th {
    background-color: #f9f9f9;
    font-weight: 600;
  }
  tr:hover {
    background-color: #f1f1f1;
  }
</style>

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>amount</th> <th>price</th><th>time_bin</th> <th>time</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>12</td> <td>25</td><td>08:00:00</td> <td>08:01:30</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>12</td> <td>26</td><td>08:00:00</td> <td>08:11:30</td> 
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>15</td> <td>30</td><td>08:00:00</td> <td>08:41:30</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>15</td> <td>32</td><td>08:00:00</td> <td>08:55:15</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>15</td> <td>35</td><td>09:00:00</td> <td>09:10:23</td> 
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20</td> <td>18</td><td>09:00:00</td> <td>09:20:33</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20</td> <td>22</td><td>09:00:00</td> <td>09:40:15</td>
  </tr>
</table>
<br>

> Following third and fourth constraints for the simplified table, succinct valid orderings are:<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following third and fourth constraints for the simplified table, the succinct valid orderings are:<br>
```

`[amount ASC, price ASC]`,   
`[time_bin ASC]`,  
`[time ASC]`  

### Table Properties  

> In summary, for the example table, the following properties can be derived:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In summary, for the example table, the following properties correctly describe the sort properties:
```

1. **Prune constant expressions**: Remove any constant expressions from the ordering requirement.
2. **Normalize the requirement**: Replace each expression in the ordering requirement with the first entry from its equivalence group.
3. **De-duplicate expressions**: If an expression appears more than once, remove duplicates, keeping only the first occurrence.
4. **Match leading orderings**: Check whether the leading ordering requirement<sup id="fn5">[5](#footnote5)</sup> matches the leading valid orderings<sup id="fn6">[6](#footnote6)</sup> of table. If so:
    - Remove the leading ordering requirement from the ordering requirement 
    - Remove the matching leading valid ordering from the valid orderings of table. 
5. **Iterate through the remaining expressions**: Go back to step 4 until ordering requirement is empty or leading ordering requirement is not found among the leading valid orderings of table.

If, at the end of the procedure above, the ordering requirement is an empty list, we can conclude that the requirement is satisfied by the table.

### Example Walkthrough

> Let's check if the ordering requirement `[hostname DESC, amount ASC, time_bin ASC, price_cloned ASC, time ASC, currency ASC, price DESC]` is satisfied by the table with properties:
> 
> - **Constant Expressions** = `hostname, currency`
> - **Equivalent Expressions Groups** = `[price, price_cloned], [time, time_cloned]`
> - **Succinct Valid Orderings** = `[amount ASC, price ASC], [time_bin ASC], [time ASC]`

Reviewer 2: It might make this easier to connect back to the usecase by explicitly stating a query this would be for.

Maybe something like

```suggestion
Let's say the user provided a query such as the following

```sql
SELECT * FROM table
ORDER BY hostname DESC, amount ASC, time_bin ASC, price_cloned ASC, time ASC, currency ASC, price DESC;
```

And the input has the same properties explained above

- **Constant Expressions** = `hostname, currency`
- **Equivalent Expressions Groups** = `[price, price_cloned], [time, time_cloned]`
- **Succinct Valid Orderings** = `[amount ASC, price ASC], [time_bin ASC], [time ASC]`

In order to remove a sort, the optimizer must check if the ordering requirement `[hostname DESC, amount ASC, time_bin ASC, price_cloned ASC, time ASC, currency ASC, price DESC]` is satisfied by the properties. 

```

Author: I thought rendering of this suggestion would be wrong. Hence, I added this suggestion manually [commit](59e1181a84ff8a89027ca7c2e5671fe5da5fbd7d) after applying other suggestions.

### Algorithm Steps

1. **Prune constant expressions**:  

>    Remove `hostname` and `curreny` from the requirement. The requirement becomes:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Remove `hostname` and `currency` from the requirement. The requirement becomes:  
```

   `[amount ASC, time_bin ASC, price_cloned ASC, time ASC, price DESC]`.

2. **Normalize using equivalent groups**:  
   Replace `price_cloned` with `price` and `time_cloned` with `time`. The requirement becomes:  
   `[amount ASC, time_bin ASC, price ASC, time ASC, price DESC]`.

3. **De-duplicate expressions**:  
   Since `price` appears twice, we simplify the requirement to:  
   `[amount ASC, time_bin ASC, price ASC, time ASC]` (keeping the first occurrence from the left side).

4. **Match leading orderings**:  

>   Check if leading ordering requirement `amount ASC` is among the leading valid orderings: `amount ASC, time_bin ASC, time ASC`. Since this is the case, we remove `amount ASC` from both the ordering requirement and the valid orderings of the table.

Reviewer 2: I think the word `prefix` is often used instead of `leading` -- maybe it is worth changing to that word

Author: The reason I use a different term is following, for the ordering `[a ASC, b ASC, c ASC]`
prefixes would be `[a ASC]` and `[a ASC, b ASC]`. However,
leading ordering would be just (e.g. first ordering)
`[a ASC]`
I wanted to distinguish between the two. However, if this is confusing I can also use `prefix`.

Reviewer 3: The leading term in the lexicographic ordering is precisely what is meant here, no? If that is indeed the case, prefix would be ambiguous here.

Author: > The leading term in the lexicographic ordering is precisely what is meant here, no? 

Yes, this is the case actually.

Reviewer 2: Thank you fro the clarification

5. **Iterate through the remaining expressions**:
Now, the problem is converted from<br>
*"whether the requirement: `[amount ASC, time_bin ASC, price ASC, time ASC]` is satisfied by valid orderings:  `[amount ASC, price ASC], [time_bin ASC], [time ASC]`"*<br>
into<br>
*"whether the requirement: `[time_bin ASC, price ASC, time ASC]` is satisfied by valid orderings:  `[price ASC], [time_bin ASC], [time ASC]`"*<br>
We go back to step 4 until the ordering requirement list is exhausted or its length no longer decreases.

> At the end of stages above, we end up with an empty ordering requirement list. Given this, we can conclude that the table satisfies the ordering requirement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the end of stages above, we end up with an empty ordering requirement list. Given this, we can conclude that the table satisfies the ordering requirement and thus no sort is required. 
```

## Conclusion

> In this post, we analyzed the conditions under which an ordering requirement is satisfied based on the properties of a table. We introduced key concepts such as constant expressions, equivalence groups, and valid orderings, using them to determine whether a given ordering requirement can be met by the table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this post, we described the conditions under which an ordering requirement is satisfied based on the properties of a table. We introduced key concepts such as constant expressions, equivalence groups, and valid orderings, and used them to determine whether a given ordering requirement are satisfied by an input table.
```

This analysis plays a crucial role in:

- Choosing more efficient algorithm variants
- Generating streaming-friendly plans

> The `DataFusion` query engine employs this analysis (and many more) during its planning stage to ensure correct and efficient query execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `DataFusion` query engine employs this analysis (and many more) during its planning stage to ensure correct and efficient query execution. We [welcome you] to come and join the project.

[welcome you]: https://datafusion.apache.org/contributor-guide/index.html
```
